COS30019 - Introduction to AI   Assignment 2 
Page 1 of 3 Part B – Machine Learning  and Software Integration  
 Due  11:59pm Sunday  25 May 2025 (Week 11)  
 Contributes  50% to your Assignment 2 result.  
 Group of 3 -4 students .  
 
 
The Part B of Assignment 2 (2B) requires you to work with your group to implement ML algorithms  to train 
ML models for traffic prediction  and integrate the traffic predictor with Part A to develop a fully functioned 
TBRGS.  
 
 
In Part B of Assignment 2, the team can use any machine learning technique or combinations of them. You 
should take advantage of existing libraries such as PyTorch, tensorflow, Keras, Theano, etc. We will provide you with a small dataset from VicRoads for the city of Boroondara that contains only the traffic flow data (the 
number of cars passing an intersection every 15 minutes). You should use this dataset for the following 
purposes: training ML models for predicting traffic conditions and testing/evaluati ng the performance of your 
models.  At the very least, your TBRGS system will need to include the two basic deep learning techniques 
LSTM and GRU. Your TBRGS system will also need to implement at least one other technique (to be 
identified by you and approved by your  tutor) to train another machine learning (ML) model and give a 
comprehensive comparison between different models.  Your program will at least need to implement the 
following features:  
 At the minimum, the TBRGS will have to be able to train ML models using the Boroondara dataset and 
give meaningful predictions based on these models  
 A GUI will be available for the user input, parameter settings and visualisation (and a configuration file for the defaults).  
 
 
The Traffic -based Route Guidance Problem 
In this problem, there are four  main tasks for the team:  
1. Implement data processing program to extract data from the given dataset and store it in appropriate 
data structures to enable ML models to be trained/ tested;  
2. Implement ML algorithms to train ML models for traffic flow prediction using the provided dataset.  
3. Implement a travel time estimation for each edge on the map of the Boroondara area.  
4. Integrate Part A of Assignment 2 with the TBRGS to replace the nodes by the intersections, the cost 
of each edge by the travel time and perform the calculation to find the top- k paths to travel from O to 
D for any given pair (O,D) of origin and destination.  
 
System requirements  
For this assignment, we expect that the team will implement data processing methods and various ML 
algorithms (including LSTM and GRU) to train ML models for traffic prediction. The team will need to use the given dataset for training and also testing t he ML models to evaluate their performance.  
 The team will also need to port the programs you developed previously for Assignment 2A to enable it to search for optimal paths on the Boroondara map. The edge cost will need to be replaced by the predicted 
travel time and subsequently, the optimal paths can be calculated and returned.  
 
The basic version of TBRGS  will be  for the Boroondara area. A user can specify the origin and destination of 
their trip as the SCATS site number (e.g. origin O = 2000 [intersection WARRIGAL_RD/TOORAK_RD] and destination D = 3002 [intersection DENMARK_ST/BARKERS_RD]). The system then returns up to five (5) 
routes from O to D with the estimated travel time along each route. To simplify the calculation, you can make 
a number of assumptions: (i) The speed limit on every link will be the same and set at 60km/h; (ii) the travel time from a SCATS site A to a SCATS site B can be approximated by a simple expression based on the 
accumulated volume per hour at the SCATS site B and the distance between A and B ( We will provide a 
simplified way to convert from traffic flow to travel time ; See the document Traffic Flow to Travel Time 
Conversion v1.0.PDF  on Canvas ); and (iii) there is an average delay of 30 seconds to pass each controlled 
intersection. Note that, the objective is not to better Google Maps but to utilise the  AI techniques you have 
COS30019 - Introduction to AI   Assignment 2 
Page 2 of 3 learned (e.g., machine learning for forecasting traffic volume, graph- based search for optimal paths) to solve 
a real -world problem.  
Report file  
You must also include a report which has to be either in Microsoft Word or in PDF whose name is your Team 
ID (for example, 123.PDF) containing your report. The aim of this report is for you to summarise your understanding of the problem and the algorithms you have used to solve the problem. We are most 
interested in the insights you have gained, especially those using data obtained by running your 
software . 
Report Details:  The report must be between 8  and 10 pages (excluding cover page and TOC) . 
• Cover page:  including details  of all group members (i.e., full names and student IDs), signed by all 
members of the group.  
• Table of contents (TOC).  
• Instructions : Basic instructions of how to use your program. You can also include a note  containing 
anything else you want to tell the marker, such as how to use the GUI version of your program, and 
something particular about your implementation.  
• Introduction: Introduce the  Traffic Prediction and Traffic -based Route Guidance  Problem and 
concise information about the algorithms the team have implemented.  
• Features/Bugs/Missing: Include a list of the features you have implemented. Clearly state if a 
required feature has not been implemented. Failure to do this will result in penalties. Include a list of 
any known bugs. Also, anything else you want to tell the marker, such as how to use the GUI version of your program, and something particular about your implementation.  
• Testing : Provide an overview of the test cases you have created to test your program (either 
manually or automatically). Report the results of testing your program.  By testing, we refer to both 
the evaluation of the ML models and the software testing you have conducted to ensure that the 
software works well.  
• Insights : Present and discuss the qualities of different ML algorithms used in your assignment. 
Which algorithms are better and why? Use data collected to support your points.  
• Research (if applicable):  If you managed to do some additional research to improve the program in 
some ways, please report it here.  
• Conclusion: Conclude with a discussion about ML algorithms and their suitability to the problem 
and about the integration of different modules to produce the end- to-end TBRGS . Include thoughts 
about how you could improve performance.  
• Acknowledgements/Resources:  Include in your report a list of the resources you have used to 
create your work. A simple list of URL's is not enough. Include with each entry a basic description of how the person or website assisted you in your work.  
• References:  Cite the sources you referred to in your Assignment (implementation, report, etc.)  
 
 
Tips: 
• All figures and tables need to be properly captioned with sensible descriptions.  
• Report presentation should include header/footer information (pages numbers, etc.)  
 
Marking Scheme:  
 
Requirements (or equivalent sections)  
Mark  
Implement appropriate data processing programs to extract data from the provided dataset and 
store data in appropriate data structures to enable ML models to be trained & tested  9 
Implement at least 3  ML algorithms (including LSTM and GRU  and an algorithm of your choice ) 
for traffic flow prediction.  7(x3) 
Conduct comprehensive evaluation to compare different ML models  
 15 
Integration of Part A & Part B to develop an end -to-end software for TBRGS  
 15 
Testing: At least 10 test cases have been created to cover different problem scenarios. Test 
results have been checked and documented.  10 
COS30019 - Introduction to AI   Assignment 2 
Page 3 of 3  
 
 
Some  ideas for research initiatives  
- The standard version of the system only deals with a small area of Melbourne (the city of 
Boroondara) and uses a very small dataset (traffic volume data for the month of October 2006). 
Under this research initiative, you can look at more comprehensive datasets from VicRoads for the 
whole Victoria in multiple years. Data processing for large amount of data will be a challenge.  
 
- The provided dataset may not provide you with details you need. You may want to consider other sources of open data. A good dataset can be found here: 
https://discover.data.vic.gov.au/dataset/traffic -signal -volume- data  
Some other  popular data sources are: https://github.com/mas -dse-
c6sander/DSE_Cohort2_Traffic_Capstone/wiki/PeMS -Data- Information and 
https://www.data.gov.uk/dataset/9562c512- 4a0b- 45ee -b6ad- afc0f99b841f/highways -england-
network -journey -time- and-traffic -flow-data. Under this research initiative , you can choose one of 
these datasets or a good data source you have access to (and get your tutor’s approval) and extend 
this project to deal with the selected network and dataset.  
 
- Visualising your system predictions and route recommendations. Inspired by Google Maps Traffic, 
can you build something similar using open source resources such as OpenStreetMap?  
Note : For some reason, the Latitude and Longitude of the SCATS sites do not map correctly to the 
actual intersections on Google Maps, you’ll have to make adjustments to overcome this issue.  
 
- For other ideas, please feel free to do the research yourselves and discuss with your tutors to get their approval first before doing the research component.  
 
 
 
 
 Report : Clear and provide sufficient information about the problem and your algorithm/solution 
AND the insights you have obtained through your program.  15 
Research : If you show some initiatives in researching about the problem and solutions, or 
carrying out extensive tests to provide interesting data about the algorithms, or getting some 
clever optimization, etc. with a well -written Research  section in the report to discuss and 
demonstrate these initiatives  15 
Total  100 
You need to follow good programming practice (e.g., well -designed, well -structure codes with 
clear and helpful comments). Failure to do so get penalty.  Up to    
-10 
For each individual student: (the maximum mark a student can get for Assignment 2 B is 100 
and the minimum mark is 0)  Mark  
 
Failure to provide in class updates of the assignment progress to your tutor.  
 Up to    
-40 
Failure to contribute to the work performed by the team or to collaborate with other team 
members to achieve the desired outcomes for the project.  Up to    
-80 